Strategy

Don't mistake complicated problem with a complex problem. Use the right strategy. If its complex, try a few smaller experiments to move the problem from complex into something more actionable.

Apply this at the operational level as well as the strategy level. Strategy puts people where they are, operational is how they perform their task.

Put people in a structure where they know what to avoid, as opposed to a structure where they know what to practice. This leaves open possibilities that can be explored.

In a highly structured environment (targets, kpis), people will work hard to achieve them, even if they have to lie.

You change things by doing. This is because you learn, even from doing a little thing. If you spend too long talking about how they will be, you fall for the sunken cost fallacy and try to believe what you want, even if you learn later on that its wrong. This can be used both ways tho, such as it isnt bad, its just not optimal.

Dont show what you want to be, you show an adjacent possible. What can we do tomorrow to create more like this, less like that. Vector measures replace outcome based target.

If you ask 50 people to interpret some information, in a way which they dont know what the right answer is, you can create a fitness landscape and see what general pattern of beliefs and what outliers exist. You can take it a step further and make each person publish a summary, then get everyone else to interpret everyone elses summaries to produce overlay contour maps show where people agree, disagree (where they wont even talk so no possibility for change) and outliers (Where a change can be made). This is distributive cognition.

Its good to know when you cant actually change something, when your not the apex predator, you need to make sacrifices and move yourself into an environment where you can change it, or reevaluate to see if you still want it and how to move closer.

States a system can be in:

Ordered- Its so constrained that all behaviour can be determined, forecast and predicted. Linear material relationship between cause and effect.

Chaotic- It is unconstrained, kind of a temporary state a system can be in. No material/ effective relationship between cause and effect. Temporary because humans add structure.

Complex- It is constrained and entangled, so you cant predict because you cant see the path through the entanglement. If you pull one string, you dont know what will heppen, if it breaks other lines, … Trying to change relationships is key.

To transition between states, you need energy.

Orderreed is not sustainable. Constrained will become unconstrained naturally.


Human perception
Human knowledge
Reality

All 3 can be different.

An individual can believe one or more at a time.

This causes misalignment in an organisation.

To reduce misalignment, you need to increase friction between all 3 groups of people.

So, you have 3 states of a system.
Ordered
Chaotic
Complex

Now, ordered can be split into 2:
Clear - Relationship between cause and effect is clear
Complicated - Relationship between cause and effect is complicated. Clear to an expert, or do research to make it clear.

Clear - Everyone agrees, so we will all do it the same way.
Complicated - Not everyone agrees

There is also another stage called Confused: You dont know which system you're in. Often people assume they are in their preferred state. Your confused and you can either be aware your confused, or not aware.

SO, how to respond to a problem in each state:

Clear - Sense -> Categories -> Respond
Behaviour here is very constrained by laws. Nothing to learn.
Can build a set of best practices. 

Complicated- Sense -> Analyse -> Respond
Behaviour here is constrained by laws. Individuals will behave differenently so cause and effect isnt exact, but its close enough.
Can set good practices, but still have some level of freedom, not 100% constrained. So, different experts will vary their practice a bit. Like developers coding differently.
It is the law. A set of rules such as always follow the blue line.
DONT: Enforce best practice here.

Chaotic- Act -> Sense -> Respond
Behaviour here is novel. Nobody has done it before. You remove connections to allow novelty to emerge.
Cant build any practice, no constraints. All practice will be novel.

Complex- Probe -> Sense -> Respond
Behaviour here is exaptive. Evidence supports conflicting hypothesis and cant resolve in given time frame. Run safe-to-fail experiment for each hypothesis in parallel..
Can set good practices. Practice is exaptive.
It is your morals. A set of rules defined by yourself based on your experiences

Next: Read https://www.adamwaselnuk.com/principles-and-mental-models for more ideas...
